
# NICE
**Neuroblastoma Immunecontexture CharactErization**

Authors: *Salvatore L Renne, Marina Valeri* 

## Background and significance 

Peripheral neuroblastic tumors (PNTs) are among the most common neoplasms of childhood, occurring especially in the first two years of life. Despite therapeutic advances, about one in two high-risk patients eventually relapse and die of the disease. Age is known to be an important prognostic factor, impacting the outcome in a continuous fashion. The optimal cut-off value has been estimated at 460 days (about 15 months), and in several classification systems well established cut-offs are: 365 days (12 months, 1 year), 547 days (18 months, 1.5 years), and 60 months (5 years) of age. The mechanism through which age exerts its prognostic effect is largely unknown, sparse evidences point toward a different genetic profiles among ages: an association between ATRX mutation and older age was described. 

The immune system, innate and adaptive, gradually develops during infancy and childhood. Infants  have impaired innate signaling pathways, tissue repair and phagocytosis, due to a lower expression of Toll-like receptor on macrophages and monocytes.  Adaptive immunity is also profoundly different from the adult counterpart: at birth, Treg are more represented than in older age(one in thirty circulating CD4+lymphocytes), contributing to immune-tolerance and thus conferring an anti-inflammatory profile. Inflammatory cells are a main component of tumor microenvironment, but they operate in conflicting ways, acting as a double edge sword in neoplasia. Immune cells specifically detect and target malignant cells, mounting demonstrable tumor-killing responses; on the other hand, they can be actively tumor promoting by supplying bioactive molecules to the tumor microenvironment, such as growth factors, survival factors, proangiogenic factors, extracellular matrix-modifying enzymes that facilitate angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. An example of this dual role can be seen in macrophages: a useful frame classifies them in non-polarized (M0) and polarized (M1 and M2) phenotypes. Classically activated macrophages (M1) stimulate antitumor response by presenting antigen to adaptive immune cells, producing proinflammatory cytokines, or phagocytizing tumor cells. In comparison, the alternatively activated macrophages (M2) express the scavenger receptors (such as CD163) and produce immunosuppressive cytokines. Furthermore, M2 polarization prevents T lymphocyte cytotoxicity and promotes tumor-supportive CD4+ regulatory T cells.

We speculated that a different composition of the immune-contexture and a higher stage of development of some inflammatory cells’ populations could mediate the detrimental effect of age on prognosis in PNTs.    
